Add workspace loading process document to docs (#2858)
gitpod-io/website: gitpod/docs/introduction/learn-gitpod/the-life-of-a-workspace.md

  1. Gitpod will automatically symlink all files recursively from `~/.dotfiles` to `~` **if you do not have an installation script**.
  2. Your installation script can run for upto 120s (2 minutes), it will receive a `SIGKILL` if it exceeds that limit.
- Any further progress will be halted until your dotfiles is fully installed.
- Logfile can be found at `~/.dotfiles.log`

### 5: `.gitpod.yml` tasks

There are different kinds of [`tasks`](/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks), they run on different stages.

The [tasks page](/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks#prebuild-and-new-workspaces) should provide you more details but here's a brief overview:

- `before` tasks are run before `init` and `command`.
- `init` tasks are run after `before`. If you're using prebuilds, `init` tasks will block further progress before completion.
- `command` tasks are run after IDE start.

Task terminal outputs are saved inside `/workspace/.gitpod` directory if you wish to inspect them externally.

### 6: Execute IDE

#### 6.1: Extensions installation and Settings Sync

> - Your IDE (i.e [VSCode](/references/ides-and-editors/vscode-extensions#installing-an-extension), [JetBrains](/references/ides-and-editors/intellij#preconfigure-for-repository)) specific extensions defined on `.gitpod.yml` are auto installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your IDE (i.e [VSCode](/docs/references/ides-and-editors/vscode-extensions#installing-an-extension), [JetBrains](/docs/references/ides-and-editors/intellij#preconfigure-for-repository)) specific extensions defined on `.gitpod.yml` are auto installed.
```

- If you're using VSCode, your user settings are synced from the [`settings-sync` server](/references/ides-and-editors/settings-sync), this includes color-themes, extensions, fonts, etc.

This step is done in the background (i.e non-blocking) so your IDE can start ahead of time.

#### 6.2: Your selected IDE is launched

### 7: Workspace stops eventually

Your workspace may stop for one of these reasons:

- You manually stopped it.
- [Due to inactivity timeout](#timeouts).
- Abuse.

So what happens to your workspace files? The following applies:

- [All files inside `/workspace` directory is persisted.](#changes-are-saved)
- [Garbase collection](#garbage-collection)

### Diagram

> <iframe title="Diagram showing the Gitpod loading process" style="border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);" width="800" height="450" src="https://www.figma.com/embed?embed_host=share&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.figma.com%2Fproto%2F9mwBY6t44zP4n9w8AQZZL9%2FGitpod-workspace-start-diagram%3Fnode-id%3D59662%253A337%26scaling%3Dmin-zoom%26page-id%3D0%253A244%26starting-point-node-id%3D59662%253A337" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Author: Ah very cool @axonasif ! 😁 

**Some thoughts:** 
1. **Suggestion:** Most of the other diagrams are created with Excalidraw, should we convert? I'm not sure if we have an official brand guide about colours, and that kinda thing. We could sync with @chrifro on this...
2. **Suggestion:** We're linking through to Figma, I think we should export the asset into the website so we don't have a dependency on the external service (e.g. we host and manage all our assets).

Do you want to make these changes @axonasif ? If not, I can pick them up with @Siddhant-K-code ?

**Aside:** We could ship this PR without the diagram (e.g. just text) and do a diagram in follow up. I'd prefer that we take our time and get things right, than worry ourselves too much to try and get the diagram in with this PR.

Reviewer 2: > Suggestion: Most of the other diagrams are created with Excalidraw, should we convert? I'm not sure if we have an official brand guide about colours, and that kinda thing.

I think you guys remember that the original diagram was on [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/#room=fb10397dd93ab229efb3,uoIgyuDBiprNcS07mvyXQA), I basically converted that for Figma. Wanted to make it a bit compact, interactive and reduce noise which was present in the original version.

> We could sync with @chrifro on this

💯 

> Suggestion: We're linking through to Figma, I think we should export the asset into the website so we don't have a dependency on the external service (e.g. we host and manage all our assets).

We can do that, for that we may have to put the dotfiles-diagram on the dotfiles page and then link it back from this page. There are additional task + IDE diagram as well.

**Request:** Let's sync up with @chrifro and still link(not embed) the figma preview for the interactive usage.

Reviewer 2: > Aside: We could ship this PR without the diagram (e.g. just text) and do a diagram in follow up. I'd prefer that we take our time and get things right, than worry ourselves too much to try and get the diagram in with this PR.

> Do you want to make these changes @axonasif ? If not, I can pick them up with @Siddhant-K-code ?

Good call, happy with that 🙌

Reviewer 2: To be honest, maintaining (i.e editing something) big diagram(s) on excalidraw is super hard (in my perspective after trying in Figma) but it sure is quick to get done. Whereas Figma is an actual editor, I learned some Figma basics while converting it from Excalidraw 🤘

Reviewer 3: True there are no clear guidelines yet on how to create diagrams for docs (I'll work on that)

>To be honest, maintaining (i.e editing something where you have multiple overlapping things) big diagram(s) on excalidraw is super hard

That's what I imagined as well. 

**Suggested solution moving forward:** 
The best way would be to have all diagrams in Figma by that they can be accessed by everyone and be easily updated. For some graphics, Excalidraw seemed to have been the easier solution before which is okay (for now) as well.

> I think we should export the asset into the website so we don't have a dependency on the external service 

I agree. It's also a lot easier to consume/read when it's embedded.

I'd say once the graphic has been finalized, I can take over and align it with our design language. 
Let me know once the Figma file is ready  🙌

Author: Regarding Figma/Excalidraw, just wanted to clear up why I mentioned Excalidraw: 

1. Last time I asked on the preferred approach, [Excalidraw was mentioned as the preferred approach](https://gitpod.slack.com/archives/C01KGM9ETU6/p1655899755006049). Happy to revisit that decision, but that might explain some context. 
2. Since other images are in Excalidraw, I was thinking about branding consistency, however this is @chrifro's call, if she's happy to move to Figma and manage how images look, etc. That works for me !
2. Is not hosted (**important distinction:** not "designed") externally (e.g. hosted on Figma or anywhere else). I don't mind where the design is, but the final asset should be exported and kept in the website repo. Currently we're linking to Figma hosting. 

**Suggestion:** A pattern I've seen work well in the past is export the raw, e.g. SVG component that can be re-imported by anyone, then also include the rendered image (if relevant) such as PNG. However, I'd defer this decision making to @Cahllagerfeld and @chrifro.

Author: > To be honest, maintaining (i.e editing something where you have multiple overlapping things) big diagram(s) on excalidraw is super hard

For our needs, and thinking skateboards 🛹 — I don't think we need a large diagram right now. The fact that we're forced to break the image down to make it fit a regular image or PNG I think is a good forcing function to make us think simpler about the diagram. I don't personally think it's worth introducing a new approach for diagramming just for this one image 🙏 Please let me know if you feel strongly against that @axonasif but I'd suggest we take the conversation about Figma embedding to a website issue so we can discuss separately?

Reviewer 2: > For our needs, and thinking skateboards 🛹 — I don't think we need a large diagram right now.
The fact that we're forced to break the image down to make it fit a regular image or PNG I think is a good forcing function to make us think simpler about the diagram.

Agree, the figma one is broken down in different parts as you've seen. We should be able to easily export and embed the SVGs on our docs.

> Please let me know if you feel strongly against that @axonasif

I want to favor the use of Figma for such diagram maintenance. Happy to work with @chrifro to get it right 🙏 
But it ultimately depends on what everyone agrees. So if we go with Excalidraw, I could try to slim it down more like the Figma one, shouldn't take long however because there's nothing new to learn there 😝

> I'd suggest we take the conversation about Figma embedding in the website to a GitHub issue so we can discuss separately

About using the html code to embed interactive figma, that's what you mean, right?

Author: Thanks, @axonasif ! 

> We should be able to easily export and embed the SVGs on our docs.

🚀 Sweet

> About using the html code to embed interactive figma, that's what you mean, right?

Yep, let's use a regular image (or SVG here), then we can discuss more advanced image embedding separately? 🙏

Reviewer: For Now, I've commented out the embed part, @axonasif feel free to add the SVG Diagram from `excallidraw` which inclines with the color scheme of other diagrams. If this is a bigger step to do, we can skip this step for this PR.

Reviewer 2: @Siddhant-K-code let's merge this one first, later I'll work with Christin and put the diagrams for tasks, dotfiles and this.

Gitpod's continuous dev environments encourages you to create fresh workspaces rather than restarting older ones.
This ensures that you are starting from a clean slate with proper configuration.

## Workspace Loading Phases (New)

A workspace creation is a linear process (from a high-level perspective) except for a few things, which we will see later.

> ### 1: New Workspace

Author: ```suggestion
### 1: Workspace Provisioning
```

> 1. New Workspace starts from the provided `git` context (e.g. GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket). If there is already a running workspace from the same context, you're prompted to reuse it.

Author: ```suggestion
1. New workspaces start with from a single `git` "context", e.g. GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket (read more about [Context URLs](/docs/introduction/learn-gitpod/context-url)). You can clone  specified with a [multi-repo](/docs/configure/workspaces/multi-repo) configuration. If there is already a running workspace from the same git context, you will be prompted to open the running workspace or to start a new one. 
```

Reviewer 2: > Mention multi-repo and single repo.

It's mentioned in the cloning stage: [here](https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/blob/66888209618205c779c94c59bbc65558200c6873/gitpod/docs/introduction/learn-gitpod/the-life-of-a-workspace.md#3-clone-repositories)

> 2. Container resource (i.e CPU and RAM) allocation is based on [Workspace classes](/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-classes#workspace-classes). The time required for allocating resources for your workspace can vary.

Author: * **Suggestion:** Prefer "workspace" over "container"
* **Question** What was the reasoning for adding the note about time to provision a workspace? 

```suggestion
2. The workspace resources (e.g. CPU and RAM) are allocated based on your configured [Workspace Class](/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-classes#workspace-classes). 
```

> 3. As one of the very first things, Gitpod checks for the existence of a `.gitpod.yml` in your repo to load some configuration for processing later.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Gitpod checks for the existence of an [`image` property](/docs/references/gitpod-yml#image) in a committed `.gitpod.yml` within the repo provided as your `git` context for a workspace. 
```

> ### 2: Docker container

Author: * **Suggestion** Prefer "Workspace Image" to "Docker" for this type of thing. 

See [internal link](https://www.notion.so/Product-Sync-03b6aec1767f4ccf9f89df8346fbd86f?d=f3a9cb0a5f244eb3bc3881e2a5535234#10ffd00670da43c3905a7466b3c3fa6d)

```suggestion
### 2: Workspace Image
```

> - By default, [**workspace-full**](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/workspace-full) docker image is used.

Author: ```suggestion
- Unless specified with the `image` property in the `.gitpod.yml`, workspaces will start based on the [**workspace-full**](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/workspace-full) image. 
```

> - If you configured a [custom image](/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-image#configure-a-custom-dockerfile), then that will be used instead.

Author: Added above. 

```suggestion
```

#### 2.1 Docker container build and pull

1. If your container image cache isn't available, it will be built.
2. The container image will be downloaded each time for your workspace.

> ### 3: Clone Repositories

Author: **Suggestion:** Imply singular and plural. 

```suggestion
### 3: Clone Git Repo(s)
```

- Normally, only the repository is cloned from which you created the workspace.
  - Your workspace may be created from any repository context (i.e issue, pull-request, branch and so on)
  - `git` submodules are initialized as well.
- Multiple repositories may be cloned using the built-in [multi-repo](/docs/configure/workspaces/multi-repo) feature.
- `/workspace/.gitpod/ready` is created after cloning is done.

### 4: Install Dotfiles

> [Dotfiles](/docs/configure/user-settings/dotfiles) allow you to customize each workspace in a reproducable manner before tasks and IDE are started.

Author: ```suggestion
[Dotfiles](/docs/configure/user-settings/dotfiles) allow you to customize every workspace according to your personal needs. Dotfiles are useful ways to extend any existing configuration with personal user configuration or overrides. A Dotfile is a GitHub repo that is (optionally) configured by a user of Gitpod in their [preferences](https://gitpod.io/preferences). 
```

When your dotfiles repository is specified in [preferences](https://gitpod.io/preferences), the following happens:

- Your dotfiles repository is `git` cloned at `~/.dotfiles` directory.
- Installation script is executed if you have one inside your dotfiles repo (i.e `install.sh` and [more](/docs/configure/user-settings/dotfiles))
  - Gitpod will automatically symlink all files recursively from `~/.dotfiles` to `~` **if you do not have an installation script**.
  - Your installation script can run for upto 120s (2 minutes), it will receive a `SIGKILL` if it exceeds that limit.
- Any further progress will be halted until your dotfiles is fully installed.
- Logs file can be found at `~/.dotfiles.log`

> ### 5: `.gitpod.yml` tasks

Author: * **thought: ** Shall we refer to tasks as "Workspace Tasks"? 🤔 [[1](/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks)]

```suggestion
### 5: Workspace Tasks
```

Reviewer 2: I was trying to be a bit specific. I would vote for undoing this change, mistakenly pressed the `Commit suggestion` button 😅

The [tasks page](/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks#prebuild-and-new-workspaces) should provide you more details but here's a brief overview:

- `before` tasks are run before `init` and `command`.
- `init` tasks are run after `before`. If you're using prebuilds, `init` tasks will block further progress before completion.
- `command` tasks are run after IDE start.

Task terminal outputs are saved inside `/workspace/.gitpod` directory if you wish to inspect them externally.

### 6: Execute IDE

#### 6.1: Extensions installation and Settings Sync

- Your IDE (i.e [VSCode](/docs/references/ides-and-editors/vscode-extensions#installing-an-extension), [JetBrains](/docs/references/ides-and-editors/intellij#preconfigure-for-repository)) specific extensions defined on `.gitpod.yml` are auto installed.
- If you're using VSCode, your user settings are synced from the [`settings-sync` server](/docs/references/ides-and-editors/settings-sync), this includes color-themes, extensions, fonts, etc.

This step is done in the background (i.e non-blocking) so your IDE can start ahead of time.

#### 6.2: Your selected IDE is launched

> ### 7: Workspace stops eventually

Author: ```suggestion
### 7: Workspace Stopping
```

Your workspace may stop for one of these reasons:

> - You manually stopped it.
> - [Due to inactivity timeout](#timeouts).
> - Abuse.

Author: ```suggestion
1. User issuing a command to stop the workspace (for example executing `gp stop`)
2. User inactivity triggering a [Workspace Timeout](#timeouts)
3. User is suspected of abusing Gitpod's [Terms of Service](https://www.gitpod.io/terms).
```
